- Often when we discuss microservices architecture,
the monolithic application is the primary target of our ire.
So let's spend a moment and consider what is
a monolithic application.
Much of my experiences with monoliths
comes in two distinct flavors.
The first and probably most prevalent for me
is large EAR deployments.
As a Java developer for much of my life,
we used to package our deployments
for large J2EE application servers using EAR files.
All of the components were built into the common
EAR file structure.
Components were packaged along with both very similar
and very different components.
These components would solve many uses,
but the issues were in both how the code operated
and how it was packaged.
A single deployment may contain internal data access
components,
business processes, web applications, web services,
and even some remote procedure calls.
All this packaged into one very large artifact.
Now let's take a look at code use
in a traditional monolithic application.
Now I often say that as a profession, developers are lazy.
If there's a shortcut, we take it.
Now this isn't an indictment of our community.
It's really simply a statement of fact.
If I can use an object designed for a purpose outside
my use case, but shoehorn my use case in
without writing a lot of code,
I often will try to do just that.
It saves time and energy, often with little immediate
side-effects.
But trust me, the side-effects exist.
That component or object now serves two masters,
and any enhancements or corrections in that component
has to solve the needs of both.
Often, this causes us to have very fragile code
that is so tightly coupled
that getting out of the mess is next to impossible.
Now that we have discussed the issues
of inter-code workings,
let's look at how that impacts delivery.
Let's say we need to make a change to our highly coupled
component.
That change, assuming it is well tested,
can pass all unit tests
and still break expected uses downstream.
So in order to deal with this,
we must test the entire deployment as part of the bug fix.
This requires massive resources for every code change
in order to just package the fixer enhancement.
We then tend to group enhancements and bug fixes
into large scale releases packaged together,
which of course impacts our speed to market
of delivering a single business critical feature.
Now let's say we have handled the coupling in our code
and handled the testing and packaging needs
of our monolithic artifact.
It's now time to deploy.
I have seen and heard of deployments of monoliths
that take days to actually do the deployment,
and then many more days of production validation.
In the monolithic world, this pain is even more apparent
if a feature coded in day one of the cycle
has been broken by the time we get to the deployment stage,
because now the whole cycle starts over again.
Simply put, agility and maintainability suffer dramatically
in a monolithic world.
Scalability is often impacted as well.
Scaling out a monolith takes deploying the entire package
even if only one set of functions is actually under load.
Considering the costs associated with monolithic deployments
as well as hardware and other infrastructure costs,
the monolithic application has lost a lot of favor
in the development community.